Good afternoon, everyone. I'm here for just about the last time on stage to welcome our last,
but absolutely not least, keynote speaker. This time you're getting an iambic hexameter.
At Duke he teaches, Kieran Healy by name, a scholar steeped in sociology's frame. He probes
how markets shift our moral ground and measures shift the ways our lives abound. His books reveal
how data orders all. The ordinal society makes that call. He's been data visualization clear
and last best gifts on blood and organs dear. His writings span two decades on the net.
At kieranhealy.org they're posted yet. Long has he coded are his trusted guide
with wit and vigor ever at his side. Please join me in welcoming Kieran.
Good afternoon, everybody. Thank you for coming. Thank you for staying right till the end.
I'm sure everyone is quite tired. The good news is this talk is mostly pictures.
Yesterday Hadley showed you all ggbot. Well, this is OG ggbot.
I am a sociologist interested in data visualization. Unlike most of you,
I work with quantitative data quite often and I think visualization is a good way to help me
investigate it and understand it. It's also a great way for me to take something that I've found
and quickly show it to somebody else. Maybe I want to explain it to other people
or just as often it's a way for me to ask a question to say I don't understand what's
happening here or what the hell is this. A bit more generally, I'm also interested in how data
and the tools that we have for collecting and analyzing data have transformed the world around
us. In that regard, I think of data visualization as a kind of synecdoche for data science as a
whole or for the use of data in society. It's part of a bigger thing that can stand for the whole
thing. For me, thinking about data visualization naturally leads to these bigger questions.
As researchers and data analysts, how should we think about our tools and techniques?
What's the relationship between our data and the world that it's about and how does that get
encapsulated by the graphs and visualizations that we draw? All of these things, I think,
have been transformed, indeed revolutionized over the past few years as the scale and scope
of what we can do with data has just gotten more and more powerful. Now, data comes in many forms
but speaking very generally, a common pattern is that we start from a stream of data that we get
from somewhere. Maybe it's the result of our own really painstaking collection efforts or maybe
more often these days it's regularly emitted by some device or some piece of infrastructure that's
already in place. That might be a network of satellites or it might be a server in a giant
air-conditioned shed somewhere or the phone in your pocket. And of course, these things aren't
that far apart anymore. And what we do is we take that stream of data and we construct some sort of
score or sequence of scores with it. And then again, sometimes that thing is something that
people habitually call a score, like a credit score. Other times it's a quantity or a coefficient
that's the result of some sophisticated model, more like an estimate or a prediction of some
result. Or maybe it's just a count or an average or a price, a score in the sense of a number that
characterizes something. And once we have that sequence or a collection of scores, we want to
use it to tell a story. And that's often the point where visualization comes in. See, look, here's what
the data look like, here's what they mean, here's what we should do next. One early stream of data
that people really wanted to tell a story about was this one, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
or averages. In the early days there was one for industry and one for the railroads and you can
just see kind of at the bottom there one for utilities too, which actually still exists.
The Dow Jones was a steady stream of data about the stock market as a whole and the desire to
transmit that data far and wide in a more or less continuous stream was one of the driving forces
behind the expansion of the telegraph, the development of modern communications technology
generally. Deep in the bones of your terminal, of your PowerShell, of your Positron or RStudio or
VS Code session, you will find the marks of the teletype and ticker tape machines that were built
to transmit price data. There was a reason that people really wanted that stream of data.
They wanted to make money and in some cases they wanted to make money by using graphs to see into
the future. This should really have been the original, I should have kept this title for the
talk. Charles Dow, the founder of both the Wall Street Journal and Dow Jones, was retrospectively
credited with the Dow Theory, which later became technical analysis. And technical analysis started
from price charts, which of course had to be drawn by hand, and combined it with a theory of
what investors in the market were thinking and then he used that to predict prices. And in practice,
the main technique was telling stories with graphs. The people who did this were the chart men,
and they were all men. The classic source is a book by Robert Edwards and John McGee called
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. It came out in 1938 and it is still in print. It's now in its
11th edition, I think. This book by William Gilers from the late 1960s was put out by Standard and
Poor's. The idea was that if you looked at trends in stock prices, either for the market as a whole
or for individual stocks, you could spot recurring patterns and patterns that told you what might
happen next. Not infallibly, of course, but enough to give you an edge, to let you make an informed
decision to buy or sell. So you start with a high-low closed chart like this one, which is
from Edwards and McGee, and then you start looking for the telltale patterns. What patterns, exactly?
Well, it turns out there are a lot. Some of them seem more or less unobjectionable.
A number will go up, a number will go down, a number will go sideways. I think this style of drawing is very
nice, by the way. They're not like sparklines, right, that people put in summary tables even today.
But the chart men also thought that you should take care to look at fluctuations within the trend.
They were very keen to argue that downward trends, true downward trends, had to be measured by the
downward trends of the highs, whereas true upward trends had to be measured by the upward tendencies
of the lows, for example. Now anyone can see a basic upward or downward trend, but at this point
the theory starts to get a little richer. One idea was that after a period of steady growth, you would
often see investors pull back from a stock as they lost confidence in it, and hence the pullback
effect. So the trick would be to sell at the top of that third peak there. They had a whole family
of these patterns, each with a name, a distinctive visual signature, and a story associated with what
to do when you spotted it. Their favorite was one that was called head and shoulders, which was this
triple peak thing where the third rally of a stock failed and it ended up falling below its original
price. And so what you really wanted to be was where the smart money was, which was selling to
buyers at the top of the head there. As I say, the underlying theory here was a kind of psychology
of market segments, which is not an unreasonable idea. John Maynard Keynes made a lot of money in
the stock market in his day and once remarked that the business of the investor was to predict what
average opinion thought average opinion would be. It's a good idea. By the way, I've often wondered
if the anti-dandruff shampoo was named after this phenomenon, and I honestly think it was.
Procter & Gamble introduced head and shoulders in 1961 and it was marketed as a medicinal cream
to well-dressed men embarrassed about getting dandruff on the collars of their suits. Men who,
as you can see here, looked at stock prices in the paper. Anyway, the chart men didn't think
these patterns were iron rules or laws of nature. They regularly cautioned that you can't just look
at the chart and read the future, obviously, because if you could then everybody would be
doing that. But they were still committed to the theory, to the story, and this led them
understandably to develop what a philosopher of science might call some auxiliary hypotheses to
save the main idea. For instance, maybe some data doesn't quite fit the head and shoulders pattern.
That's probably because sometimes head and shoulders patterns are complex, like maybe you
have two heads, or two shoulders, three or four shoulders. You already have two shoulders. Maybe
sometimes there's a failure pattern either at the bottom or at the top, and of course when I say a
failure pattern, what I mean is that the world has failed us in some way, not the theory, because
our theory knows about failure patterns. We have a name for them and everything. So the technical
analysts, the chart men, poured over charts like this and they made their recommendations. They told
their stories with their data. What killed this theory in the end was the rise of the efficient
markets hypothesis in its various forms, and that's the idea that in something like the stock
market, asset prices reflect all available information, or at least all publicly available
information about an asset. So in the short run, prices follow a random walk. That means you can't
consistently beat the market, at least not like this. The technical analysis people were just
reading patterns into noise. Sure, sometimes it worked, but in the long run, you wouldn't
outperform an index fund, except by luck. I wanted to write a little tiny bit of code to generate
a random walk of stock prices, and I was kind of hoping it had produced one of the standard
patterns, and I put in my seed for today's date, and sure enough, it did on the first try.
The thing about the chart men is that there's nothing untrustworthy about their data.
The stream of information they used came straight from Dow Jones, and as for the score, well, the
thing about technical analysis is that it wasn't that technical. Really the only score or technique
they used was putting the numbers into graphs, which was a painstaking business. You had to do
it by hand, and there's nothing wrong with the graphs either, considered as graphs. Some of them
are really good. What's wrong, of course, is the story, which is nonsense. Now, we don't like to
think of ourselves as the sort of people who'd be taken in by something like looking for head
and shoulders patterns in price charts, and certainly we don't want to think of ourselves
as the sort of people who are inflicting some version of this sort of thing on our audiences.
For one thing, you might say, look, I'm not trying to predict the future. I just want to describe
something that happened. I just want to explore my data. Or you might say, hey, I actually have a
real theory, a proper theory that can explain the thing I'm showing you. I have real evidence.
But this tendency really is pervasive. Here's an example from a few years ago. Vox published a
story discussing this startling rise in the availability of fats, especially vegetable fats,
in people's diets. It was pretty widely circulated. That word availability should alert you already to
that there might be something going on, because the availability of something in your diet isn't
the same as you actually consuming it. But beyond that, the fact that something like 20 pounds of
this increase happened in about a year is odd. You can probably guess how this ends,
but the thing is people really, and I mean really, wanted to tell a story about this trend.
Maybe something about long-term shifts in the American diet, the insidious rise of veganism,
stress eating caused by the Y2K problem, the emergence of avocado toast as a central feature
in millennials' lives. That was actually one of the theories. In fact, what happened was a change
in reporting requirements. A good rule of thumb is that if you see a sudden shift or discontinuity
in a time series like this, your first question should be, did something about the data generating
process change? You should sort of tap the instruments. Or better, try finding someone
who knows where the data came from. As Tom Smith of the National Opinion Research Center likes to
say, if you want to measure change, you can't change the measure. In this case, unlike with
the Chartman, there really is a big signal in the data. It's just not signaling what people imagined.
But in both cases, what people want to do is eyeball a graph and spin you a yarn. I don't think
graphs are uniquely to blame here. People like to tell stories, and they'll tell them with whatever
is at hand. But I think it's fair to say that people giving talks like the one I'm giving right
now can be tempted to make quite strong claims about visualization's unique capacity to provide
insights into the structure of your data. Maybe it's just the idea that visual storytelling or
a strong data narrative makes good graphics uniquely compelling in a way that conveys your
insights to others. And implicitly or explicitly, there's also this idea that the best data
visualizations are authoritative, that they can decisively settle a question or definitively make
a point. We kind of want these things to go together, right? We want to make something that
fuses an insightful, compelling, and authoritative use of data into a single, immediately accessible
image. Ideally something like this, for instance, the one John Snow made with the Broad Street water
pump, pinpointing the existence of a cholera outbreak before going and removing the handle
from the pump. The little squares are measures of deaths in the buildings on the streets.
There really is something to the idea that a good graph can do a fantastic job here. A compelling
and authoritative insight is an epiphany, a moment of truth. And a great graph is a kind of portable
epiphany. The history of data visualization, or maybe I should say the history of data visualization
talks, gives many examples. These often come with little stories of their own, little tiny myths,
like how a particular image kick-started the field of epidemiology, or explained why the Challenger
space shuttle exploded, or summed up the reality of climate change for people. But I think we need
to be careful. Don't get me wrong, some of these graphs are really good, elegantly assembled,
cleanly executed, really effective. I wish I had drawn them. But the thing is, we know this can't
be the whole story, as it were, because even if we just consider graphs alone, we know it's not the
whole story, because the other thing data visualization talks are full of is examples of
really bad graphs. Like this one, for instance. If you had to bet your life, what would you say
those values are? I wonder. I won't keep you in suspense. To be fair, the 3D column chart is not
the default way that Excel draws bar charts. You have to make a slight effort to define the 3D
option. But believe me when I say, people are willing to put the work in. We love these terrible
examples, and there are so many of them. Every time you think people have finally stopped using
axonometric or oblique projections to show three or four numbers, a new one comes along. And I
won't show any more. But examples like this do tend to undermine this noble story of visualization
as a distinctively powerful source of insightful, compelling, and authoritative narratives. They make
it clear that there's a lot more going on when we put together a visualization, a lot more ways for
things to go sideways, or if not sideways, maybe sort of backwards and up about 120 degrees.
And it's not just a matter of badly chosen graph types either. We have undeniable evidence that
this whole business of just looking at anything is totally broken. And I don't just mean
your choice of graph. I mean it's a mess like all the way down.
Now, I acknowledge that navigating a slowly cooling universe filled with blobs of condensed
matter in a hellscape of electromagnetic radiation while not being eaten is a really hard problem to
solve, especially on the fly. But still, whoever designed the human visual system has a lot to
answer for. Maybe not as much as the knee group, or the lower back team, who have been
or the lower back team who hired those people, but still a lot. Visual perception is weird. The
human eye is not a light meter, for example. It runs on relative contrast, not absolute brightness.
Those two squares are the same shade of gray. People don't believe you, but I'm just covering
it up. And methods for visualization have to deal with these things, sometimes riding around them,
sometimes leveraging them. But as I say, we know all this. And that's why I'm not dwelling on a
parade of horrible graph crimes. We have decades of work, from William Cleveland in the 1980s,
on down to the present, investigating what does and doesn't work when it comes to visually
representing data. Working out how good or bad people are at reconstructing relationships in
the data based on graphs that we show them. Knowing how evolved features, capacities,
and limits in the human visual system fare when put to work at looking at data, a task that they
did not evolve to conduct. We really know a lot, and not just the relatively simple stuff either.
But super tricky things, like color perception. And not only that, we all benefit from the many
years of hard work getting to put this into practice. The work to develop a flexible and
powerful conceptual language for describing graphs, like Leland Wilkinson's grammar of graphics.
The work done by people in this room to develop tools to implement those ideas in software,
like ggplot. The work to integrate it with other freely available tools, developed in the same
spirit of openness and cooperation, in a giant collaborative enterprise that lets me sit in my
kitchen and pull down, process, and visualize, say, 40 years of global sea surface temperature data,
where each day has about 4 million observations. As if that was a reasonable thing to expect to do
in your kitchen. It's not even a very nice kitchen. It's not even remodeled.
So this is where we are now. Version 4 of ggplot has just come out, and congratulations to everybody
involved in getting it out the door. As June pointed out in the announcement, ggplot is old
enough to vote now. Unlike most 18-year-olds, it is mature, well-organized, and stable.
And so are other visualization packages and frameworks and toolkits in the R community
and beyond this, in Python and the JavaScript people, and many more besides. We really are in
excellent shape. Our software is reliable in the sense that it does what we expect it to do.
It maps quantities and features to points, lines, shapes, and colors in a perceptually accurate way.
The way we work is also increasingly reproducible. The tools that we have for scripting, testing,
and rebuilding our work are better than ever. The people who make Cuarto have been doing
fantastic work to make it easier than ever to produce and publish reports, articles, and books,
while still keeping things based on code that we can rewrite and rerun.
And there's that last part. We want our visualizations to be trustworthy in some
general sense. Are they? Can they be? And what exactly is the role of software when it comes
to making our work more trustworthy? After all, when someone tells you a story, when someone
shows you a graph and gives you an interpretation of it, you want to know whether you can believe
them, whether you can trust it. Here's why I think this is worth emphasizing. I think that whatever
it is that makes a data visualization trustworthy, it isn't really something you can include in the
graph. If you look at stock examples of bad graphs, especially older ones, it's kind of comforting
because most of them look really janky. And the same goes for contemporary examples of bad
marketing materials or from media outlets trying to spin some ridiculous visual summary of polling
data. They don't look trustworthy. It's possible to make janky graphs with ggplot, but you kind of
have to work at it. By default, ggplot makes a lot of good choices for you, and this gives it what
you might call a kind of aura of plausibility. Whatever data you're showing and whatever story
you're telling benefits from a kind of rhetoric of credibility that's built into the software,
more or less out of the box. With just a little bit of extra work, you can polish up your dot plot
to make a poster, or if it's your job, you can make an effective visual argument into financial
times like John Byrne Murdoch does there, or a beautiful, well-thought-out contribution to
Tidy Tuesday like Cedric Shearer does in the bottom right corner there. So what does that mean
to trust a visualization? As you might expect, there are large social scientific and philosophical
literatures about trustworthiness. And like in many social scientific literatures, if you read them,
you find that empirical studies confirm that trust has many dimensions. It's also really quite
hard to measure, and it's very complicated. And like in many philosophical literatures, if you
read them, it turns out that trust has many senses, and it's really quite hard to give a unified
account of, and it's very complicated. Ever since the work of Annette Byer, the philosophical
literature has made this distinction between trust and what gets called mere reliability.
Now, in ordinary speech, trust can mean reliability too, but the idea is that our
everyday way of talking is fairly loose, and it runs together something that's worth making a
distinction about. And the argument is roughly that there are a lot of things in people that
we rely on without actually trusting them. In particular, if they failed, we wouldn't say
that we expected an apology from them. We wouldn't feel betrayed. We wouldn't feel that we'd been
lied to. So for example, I might rely on you having a USB cable I can borrow in an emergency
if I want to give a presentation, because I know you're the kind of person, I know you're out there,
who has a bag full of cables from all kinds of things, and you've always had one before when I've
asked to borrow one. But if I needed one and you happened not to have your bag with you one day,
I couldn't reasonably say that you had betrayed my trust. Or I might rely on my alarm clock to
wake me up, but if it failed one morning, I'd be making a kind of mistake if I thought that
it owed me an apology. Another philosopher, Catherine Hawley, argues that trusting someone
to do something means, first of all, believing that they have a commitment to doing a thing,
and then relying on them to meet that commitment. A trustworthy person keeps their commitments.
And when you mistrust someone, it's because you think they have a commitment to something,
but you doubt that they can be relied on to meet it. What's interesting about Hawley's view,
amongst other things, is the negative implications of that. Because being trustworthy, for her,
is mostly about making sure you don't end up getting stuck with commitments that you can't,
won't, or don't fulfill. Being trustworthy doesn't mean taking on as many commitments as
you possibly can. Being trustworthy doesn't mean that you have an obligation to be responsive to
every single demand made of you. Being trustworthy doesn't mean that you're answerable to literally
anyone. Now, in a talk like this, I can't give these ideas the room they deserve, but they're
useful when we think about what we're looking at when we're looking at data and we're showing
visualizations. Because even in quite technical discussions, I find that
when we're talking about how we should proceed or what should we do,
again, even in quite technical discussions, the topic moves very quickly to issues of
social relations, of people's roles, and the expectations associated with these roles,
what we can reasonably expect. Not so much the technical issues, but sort of the context in
which they're embedded and whether we can, you know, what should we expect of others and what
are the limits on those expectations? And this is a general feature of any kind of organized
knowledge production. Data visualization is a good case because a graph is such a deceptively
simple and portable object. When you make a graph and tell a story with it, all kinds of norms and
expectations get compacted down into this single thing, into an image meant to authoritatively
convey some structured bit of information to somebody. And when you tell a story with your
data, you're implicitly warranting it. You're making some commitments. You're not offering an
unconditional warranty. You're not beholden to everyone for all time. But questions of trust do
arise. So when you look at this modern classic of data visualization, for example, what I made,
you might ask yourself, can I trust this? Does it look like the person who made this knows what
they're doing? And if you spent any time looking at graphs, then you know the answer is absolutely
not, which is too bad. I mean, look at these beautiful drop shadows, that finely textured
wood grain, the tasteful use of papyrus, the king of off-brand herbal tea fonts. What could be more
warmly authentic? No. As a seasoned consumer of visualizations, you know that you're better off
relying on something more like this, something with a higher data-to-ink ratio, as Edward Tufty
would say, although you might also think we could do a little better, maybe something like this.
This is a Cleveland dot plot. Here, the x-axis doesn't go to zero, just covers the range of
the data. That's ggplot's default behavior, and it's the default behavior in most modern
visualization toolkits. By the way, here's some advice. Any graph with a categorical axis
and a continuous axis is really a kind of table in disguise. So put your categories on the y-axis,
that is, in the rows, and the continuous value on the x-axis. No more faffing about trying to
rotate your text or your head. For many audiences, a graph like this is perfectly fine,
but it's easy to think of cases or audiences where the reaction might be quite different.
Here's a graph comparing all-cause mortality in 2020 to the years 2015 to 2019 for the United
States. If I share this on social media, I guarantee you that someone will yell at me
that I'm being misleading because the y-axis doesn't go to zero. They will demand that it
should be changed, or they will personally insult me. I guess I should say, and they will
personally insult me. I can guarantee this because it's happened several times. The people who
complain insist that it should look like this instead. Now, oh, sorry, we went a little too
far there. Let's go back one. Like this instead. This is worse. It's not wrong, but it's worse.
There's no reason, there's no real need for the y-axis to go to zero. For one thing,
the relevant baseline comparison is already in the graph. It's the gray lines that show what's
happening for the five years prior to COVID. And second, there are over 340 million people living
in the United States, and nobody reasonably thinks that there are weeks when nobody dies.
The thing is, though, you can't do much in the graph itself to make this point to someone who
is looking at it. Maybe they know and accept the point, maybe they don't. If you have the time,
I suppose you could explain why any kind of iron rule that says the y-axis should go to zero
would be unreasonable. Now we can look at this. For instance, here's a graph of a long time series
of mean daily global sea surface temperatures with the baseline set to zero degrees Kelvin.
This was calculated from real data, by the way. Over 17 million spatially weighted observations.
But you can't explain this personally to everyone who sees your COVID graph, and it probably
wouldn't help to put a note at the bottom either. I do have some sympathy for the people who get
upset about baselines, because for one thing, at least they're reading the access labels,
and maybe people have, you know, it happens less often than you think, and maybe people have tried
to put one over on them in the past. But my point is just that there's only so much you can do with
any particular image to establish your trustworthiness. The design of the graph can't by
itself do it for you. The real problem, as always, is people. But they're also the solution. It's
like Homer and beer. The pictures we make are about something. They're made for someone to look
at. So we'd like to know, how much does the person know about the data that we're drawing? How much
do they know about the way that I'm drawing it? Sometimes the only person looking at what you make
is you, but you should still ask that question, because people have a very strong tendency
to go straight to the most complicated thing that they kind of know how to do,
whether they're drawing a graph or fitting a statistical model. But in any case, someone is
looking at it. And so there's a relational aspect to any informative visualization. In terms of the
commitments involved, it's a two-sided relation. People may make some demands of you, but if we're
making a thing, we can also have some expectations. At the level of the graph itself, there's a set
of conventions of representation that your audience needs to understand in order to comprehend the
graph at all. And as I've said, a lot of the basics of this get handled to a very high standard by
default in good software, but the people looking at it still have to understand it, and that can
be more challenging than you imagine. So it depends on what you can expect from your audience.
And beyond that, there's whatever meaning the information you're providing carries for the
person looking at it. Those expectations that they have, the setting in which they encounter it,
the associations they have with it, usually you have very little control over any of that.
These days, in fact, one of the decisive features of the social life of images is the way that
their context can just collapse completely very fast. So last year, I wasn't able to see the total
eclipse, and the day after it happened, I went to NOAA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and downloaded a sequence of images from GOES-East. GOES-East is the
geostationary satellite that sits over the Earth and is responsible for where US weather maps come
from. A new GOES-East image gets posted every 10 minutes, and so you can stitch them together
into a little animation. So there's the eclipse from space. It's pretty nice. I posted this on my
website, and the next day it ended up on the front page of Hacker News. If you don't know what that
is, well, I envy you in the purity of your innocence. So I went and looked at the comments,
which is a rookie mistake, and this was one that jumped out. Now, on the one hand,
leading with, is that animation fake, is a little obnoxious. On the other hand,
it's kind of a reasonable question to ask of a context-free image. I mean, this person is right.
You can see the clouds on the dark side of the Earth in that image if you rerun it, and you
can't really see the clouds at night from space like this. So what's happening? Well, the camera
on GOES-East isn't a Kodak Instamatic from 1968 or something. It's an array of image sensors that
look at different parts of the spectrum, and some of those are in the visible part of the light
range, but other sensors look at cloud coverage via the infrared, and so you do some image
processing and you get a composite image where you can see both the light and the dark parts at once.
What commitments have I made to internet randos on Hacker News? Well, to be honest, none.
I made the image for my own benefit. I put it on my website and left it at that, but then the next
day when I woke up to my horror and found that it had gotten tens of thousands of views,
I did add a note explaining the image a little, providing links to the GOES satellite and its
image feed. So I suppose I did feel that I owed the audience in general, if not a particular
querulous commentator, a bit. But there are limits, sharp limits, I think, to how much more I owe them.
What's at stake here, I think, in general, is what you might call a social production of trust
and credibility alongside the organizational and institutional production of data.
Data visualizations get made and shared. The data comes from somewhere. The image is made by someone
using some pipeline of software tools. What we want to know is whether that process is reliable
and whether the people behind it are trustworthy. And even though you can partially, I contend,
institutionalize and formalize many aspects of that process, at its core you can't fully automate it.
Now don't get me wrong, software can help a lot, especially with reliability. I said earlier that
reliability and reproducibility were related. Resources like CRAN, tools like PAC and ORANS
and TARGETS can do a tremendous amount to impose order on the unruly business of analysis and
reporting and visualization pipelines. But even though these tools give us a lot, their creators
don't present them as some sort of panacea. They can't, and they're not meant to, eliminate the need
or automate the process of discovery. They can't, and they're not meant to, eliminate the need for
people who know what they're doing. For one thing, you need some expertise to use these things
properly. And that's why I think of these issues less in terms of transparency as a sort of abstract
standard, more in terms of webs of relations and ongoing commitments between people who know what
they're doing. Transparency is no good if you don't know what you're looking at.
A second problem is that once you start working backwards along the causal chain,
the requirements for full reproducibility and full automation never end. As Carl Sagan remarked,
to make an apple pie from scratch, first you must create the universe.
In practice, even when you have a fantastic, fully versioned, cryptographically signed,
transparently organized build process that can bootstrap and validate an analysis all the way
from the bare metal to figure one, those tools still ground themselves out socially in groups
of real people who know what they're doing and who aren't cheating. Although, recently,
we've been facing three hard questions, questions that I'll say right away I do not have easy
answers to. The first is, what happens when people have a thought that goes, hey,
what if I just made up my data? What if I just pretended to do the thing I said I did?
Our chart men might have been fooling their audiences with their stories of
pullbacks and head and shoulders and resistance patterns and support levels,
but at least they were fooling themselves as well. There wasn't anything fraudulent about
their data either, or about what they did with it. They weren't frauds, they were just wrong.
That's not the world we live in now. There are very strong temptations, or, as we now politely
say, incentives, to do the wrong thing. Some of those incentives are just money,
some of them involve the undeniable attraction of being up on stages like this. It's very nice.
But not only that, thanks to the very same tools we use to analyze and validate real data,
it's now easier than ever to generate streams and scores that are plausible looking,
but fraudulent. As I say, I do not have an easy answer to this, except to say that it's
a real problem. Science runs on trust, and it is not set up to detect fraud. If you had to check
fully the authenticity of literally every piece of data that came across your desk,
every single piece of research, not just whether it was done correctly or in line with your
standards, but whether the numbers were even real, then everything we do would grind to a halt
immediately. Most people meet most of their commitments most of the time. They're professionals,
they believe in what they're doing, and they do the right thing. But the flip side to having
a system that necessarily runs on trust is that some people take advantage of that trust and
exploit it. When you do find people who are cheating, you have to punish them.
The second question goes something like, hey, what if I could just replace all those messy
and difficult people with a robot? Maybe a robot running on hardware at least as powerful as my
home visualization workstation here. Specifically, what if I could get a large language model
to read just a tremendous quantity of stuff which I got from somewhere, and then I could ask it
questions and have it fluently tell me the answer? Or at least have it emit output that the biggest
matrix you've ever seen in your life says is what an answer probably looks like. Hey, I mean, if not
answer, why answer-shaped? In the language that I've been using here, LLMs, I'd say, face challenges
both to reliability and trustworthiness. On the reliability side, when you want to take advantage
of the tremendous leverage they undeniably offer for certain tasks, you have to proceed with a fair
amount of caution just because of how they work. Everything becomes a measurement problem, which
we're pretty used to in the world of data analysis. The ways these things can fail, though, can be
quite unexpected and alien, and we heard about some of those challenges yesterday and how to
address them maybe. Meanwhile, on the trustworthiness side, at least in their current consumer-facing form,
you have other problems. You may recall an incident from a few months ago when a vibe-coding
entrepreneur had a bad experience with an AI he was using. At one point, he was so annoyed to
discover that it was faking unit tests that he made it write him an apology letter. And then a bit
later, when it deleted his production database, the AI explained how it had violated everyone's trust
and was like really totally super sorry. It sounded very sincere, too. Now, I think that asking an AI
to write you an apology letter is a little bit like me finding my alarm clock $20
when it doesn't wake me up. But you can see how people end up here. LLMs talk to you as if
they were capable of making and abiding by commitments in a way that a person is. They
very strongly encourage the intentional stance that people are naturally disposed to have,
that disposition to interact with anything that looks like it might be conscious as if it really
was. What LLMs often find it very hard to do is to say, no, that's not something I can reliably do,
or I don't know the answer, or actually I should just leave this blank. That is to refuse to take
on commitments that they can't meet in a way that a trustworthy person would refuse to take
on commitments that they can't meet. Instead, if a task is nominally within its scope, an LLM will
often keep insisting that it is things figured out this time. Now, you might reply, eh, a skill
issue. Engineer your prompt so that it doesn't do that. Fair enough, and I'm not saying it can't
happen. But then you are in a strange sort of world where you're trying to evoke quasi-trustworthy
behavior by writing the robot a begging letter and then sort of rolling 46 against your charisma
while still being personally responsible for everything that it does.
Right now, it does seem like this tendency is built in to the current generation of LLMs.
A recent paper just this month by a group of open AI researchers is consistent with a lot of prior
research on this topic. The authors note that LLMs have a really hard time saying, I don't know,
and they discuss how this has its origins in pre-training and why it persists in the
face of attempts to eliminate it in post-training. One of several forces pushing things in that
direction is the way that benchmarking consistently rewards providing an answer over saying,
I don't know. Of course, this might improve or be solved in the future, and there are ways it
can be more or less mitigated. But right now, it's kind of built in to AIs that they tend to
overcommit in this way, and that's what makes it hard to trust them. In a way, it's like the
HAL we've ended up with is untrustworthy like the old HAL, but for totally different reasons,
like for the opposite reason. Half the struggle is inductively figuring out what commitments the
robot can reliably keep. The third question is about where data comes from. If we take the
perspective of, let's say, the last two centuries, there's been an absolutely mind-boggling expansion
in the capacity of organizations to collect, maintain, and analyze increasingly large
quantities of data. That began with the expansion of states as compulsory organizations looking to
collect information about their own populations and territories. It was enhanced by other formal
organizations, the modern corporation doing similar things on a smaller scale, and it was
supercharged by a series of revolutions in information technology that we're still living
through. If we take the perspective of, let's say, the last two fiscal quarters, then a lot of things
people have taken for granted about the state's continued capacity for collection and analysis
of data is very much in question. That word mere in the phrase mere reliability, the one that the
philosophers use all the time, suddenly appears a little complacent as questions of institutional
reliability and trustworthiness are on everyone's mind. All I want to emphasize here is the
tremendous degree of reliance that we have on a data collection infrastructure that consists mostly
of public institutions or the product of work done funded by public institutions, by people
trained at public institutions, and on tools that are produced and contributed to voluntarily
or engineered and maintained in the public domain. One last example of the difficulties involved with
getting a stream of data, accurately producing a score, and telling a visual story in a trustworthy
way. NOAA is one of several international organizations that has collected, managed,
and distributed climate data over the years. Thanks to those efforts, we have a number of
carefully maintained time series of sea surface temperature measurements, some going back well
into the 19th century. Some years ago, there was quite a bit of debate in the scientific literature
about how this particular time series didn't quite line up with other data that we had from other
sources of measurement. In particular, the sea surface data seemed to indicate a kind of pause
or plateau in warming in the post-war period, beginning around 1940, when other indicators did
not. Some very careful work by various scientists, not all of them working in the same group or
anything, but a lot of independent work, established what was going on. It's one of the basic but
repeatedly forgotten lessons of the sociology of science that measurements come from somewhere
and are eventually turned into data. The sociologist Bruno Latour liked to think that
there was a moment when they passed from being a thing in the world into being a record.
How do you measure the ocean surface temperature in the 1800s? If you're part of the Royal Navy
and oceans are battlefields, you do that with a wooden bucket thrown over the edge of your ship.
Eventually though, sailing ships get replaced by steam and then diesel engines and the method of
getting the temperature changes. On newer ships, you measure the seawater that's pumped into the
engine room to cool the engines, before you use it to cool the engines, and the water that way tends
to be warmer than water hoisted up in a wooden bucket, because a wooden bucket is not a good
insulator. Then later, someone digitizes a lot of U.S. Navy logbooks and adds them to the time series.
That makes for more warm biased measurements, especially for years when there are suddenly a
lot more American Navy ships floating around in the North Atlantic, like starting around 1940,
for some reason. And so you get a spike in apparent ocean temperatures, which make subsequent years
look like they plateau for a while, and thus the so-called bucket correction is born. Our score
needs to be adjusted. Later, temperature sensing gets done in other ways that are more comprehensive,
more standardized, more automated. The end result, or one end result, is me taking advantage of all
this careful work, instead of remodeling my kitchen, to draw a picture on my laptop.
Actually, more than a picture, we can make an animation with this. This is an animated
recreation of a graph you might have seen circulating in a few places. I'll set it running.
We're just tracing changes in daily global averages, year after year. The graph employs
the standard virtues of ggplot, a layered structure where we try to highlight the elements
we're interested in, where we repeat design elements in a way that lets the viewer follow
the structure of the data and the graph more easily. Conceptually, it's just the same as the
COVID figures I showed earlier. It's just animated, thanks to Thomas Lynn Peterson's gganimate package.
The thing is, the trustworthiness of this visualization has very little to do with the
graph directly. The trustworthiness comes from a web of actors that includes government-sponsored
data collection, private sector organizations, universities, scientific institutes, individual
technicians, researchers, scientists, engineers, staffers, midshipmen, all making and meeting their
commitments to one another. If you think all of that is fake, or a put-up job, there isn't anything
I can draw, there's no mark I can put on a page or a screen that can fix that. You're here.
Data visualization is a terrific tool to learn about streams of data and to make sense of the
scores that you calculate from it. It's one of many tools that we have in data science. It has
some special properties because of its ability to condense those streams and scores into images
that you can tell a story with. But that's all the more reason for us to be wary of finding
ourselves using it to spin yarns. There are a lot of ways for a story to go wrong. Our tools won't
and can't save us by themselves. The important thing is not to lose sight of the collective,
cooperative character of the whole enterprise, the part that Vicky Boykus calls normcore tech.
That's the thing made out of all those people who just know a bunch of really specific stuff,
much of it particular or local knowledge about how something works, or a specific data set,
or what something is made of, or why you just broke that by mistake, and how to fix it. They know a
lot about this specific data set, or that particular method, or this weird bill system.
They're there in your division of labor, just knowing things. Many of you probably are that
person for some other people, and we all have someone else that we rely on to be that person
for us. Data is always a bit of a mess. Our methods could always be improved. Our software
could always be better. Sorry, Adly. New technologies can be extremely weird.
This collection of organized systems and loose networks, of written procedures and local
knowledge, formal organizations and social ties that sustains what we do, it isn't perfect,
because of course it can't be. It's made of people. But it's where trustworthy data visualization,
where trust in everyone's work is produced and sustained. It exists not as some frozen structure,
or an abstract set of standards, but as a living mesh of ongoing exchanges and commitments made
and met. The challenge, I think, is keeping that trust alive in the world where we all now live
and work. Thank you very much for your time.
Thanks, Kieran. So we have time for a few questions. Remember, if you want to ask any
questions of Kieran, you can find the Slider link in the app. I thought I would start with
a personal question. I noticed you shared a number of ggplots, and none of them used the
default theme. Why do you hate me? When someone sets such a high standard, you don't want to
confront it head-on. You've got to kind of ride around it. Okay, real question. Data collection
and presentation has been highly politicized and that will likely continue in the near future.
How can we as data consumers survive in this environment? You have to know where your data
comes from, and who's making the visualizations, and why they're making them. I mean, I think the
whole thrust of the talk is that both as data consumers and as data producers, the graph can't
sustain the weight of managing the politics of truth in a polarized society. It just can't,
and so we need to think about sort of how everything else is organized, too. The layers
underneath the visualization is like the tip of the sphere. It's the thing that is most easy to
circulate for a context to collapse around and for, you know, to become the focus of conflict,
but really what we want to look at is the stuff underneath that generates the trust or lack
thereof. I've got lots of softballs for you, Kieran. How can visualization help when segments
of the population have become actively hostile to anything fact-based?
It can help in the same way that all the other tools that we have can help. Original data
collection, careful validation, tables, models, but all of those things depend on an ongoing network
of commitments that people are making to one another, and the result is that the formal products,
all of those formal outputs, are not sufficient by themselves. There's no magical force that they
have. It doesn't matter whether you use the default theme in ggplot or some super fancy one.
That's not going to be enough to change somebody's mind. It's an important part. Now,
it's not true. At the margin, you can change people's minds with data, but I think that in
order to get to that point, you still have to be in front of people who are at least in principle
receptive to the idea that their mind might be changed or that they're open to the idea of new
evidence. If that is, by hypothesis and the question, fully closed off, then almost by
definition there's nothing you can do, but I refuse to believe that we're quite that badly off just yet.
With AI now allowing us to create images on their own,
what does that mean? Do you think that makes reproducibility
and open source even more important? It makes it more important, and it makes it
sort of weird and difficult, because it's clear that what's happening, I mean, a company like
Posit, and you're representative of everybody is facing this challenge, but you think of
organizations like this as really having built their reputation over the last decade on
reproducibility and code. That's why you're supposed to switch to RStudio and move away
from Excel and things like that. It's because you can write code that you can then validate and
test and make it reproducible, and then in the AI case, in the middle of that argument about openness
and transparency and reproducibility, you throw this kind of hand grenade that explodes into this
kind of writhing mass of a thing that you're not quite sure how to control yet. Now, ideally, in
the near future we'll know one way or the other whether it's reliable, but it's a real
kind of spanner in the works. I will say just to add that the AI on the analysis
side is what's posing that challenge, and then also certainly in the social sciences,
and I think beyond, there's a similar or analogous problem on the data side because
similarly we have all this push towards open and accessible data as the source of where the best
science comes from, but at the same time, in many cases, there's never been higher returns
to people's careers to being able to get a hold of a special trove of data from, say, like a social
media company or something that nobody else can get access to, and you can make your, you know, so
there's this strange bifurcation that's happening both at the level of data and at the level of
analysis that's posing. I think there hasn't been a sort of upheaval like this on both of those
fronts probably since the advent of computing as a standard way to do data analysis at all,
and so we're not sure what's going to happen. Yeah, I think a hand grenade's a good metaphor.
We know one of the things, like obviously reproducibility, open source, very highly
valued to me, but sort of interesting, like what I've tried to spend a lot of my career doing is
making it as accessible to people as possible by making the software so you can express yourself
with software as easily as possible, and it's so fascinating that now LLMs give you a way to
express yourself really, really easily and naturally, but maybe it's not always,
obviously not always reliably or not always correct. It's just such an interesting
like hint and challenge. And I think one of the pressing questions, I mean part of it is just like
we don't really understand these technologies properly yet, and so one of the questions is
going to be, well is it just going to be the case that it's ineradicably a feature of how LLMs or
their successor technologies work that they have this tendency to overcommit, for example. If that
was the case, then you really couldn't, you can't trust them in the long run. There won't be a way
around that problem other than trying to cage this thing, but it's not going to work.
Whereas if there's a solution to a problem like that, well then that's one big category of
problems that would just go away, and there would be others, but that would be a major one for,
that would make it much easier to mesh that with sort of the reproducibility ideals that we have.
Yeah, it's sort of interesting because then when you like, when you think like, do you, if like open
eye, if open AI said we have solved the hallucination problem, like would you trust them?
If they said, yeah, you know, there's like, if open AI made a plane, would you fly in it?
I mean, that's kind of the question I feel like. I learned that from the, I learned that test from
the check, from the cash desk of a mountain bike firm that I used to shop, that I used to go to
in Tucson. It said if Huffy made an airplane, would you fly in it? And that's kind of the,
that's kind of the question. Like the thing is if open AI say that they, or any company
says that they have solved this problem, then you, they should be able to demonstrate that
that's the case. You could, you could, there must be some method that like you can show that,
that it's, that it's reliable within some tolerances or whatever. And that's,
that's going to be the asset test.
Here's a very practical question for you. How do I convince my boss we don't need to start
all axes at zero?
Well, there's a useful book on the left there that maybe you could buy for the whole company,
like more than one coffee.
You know, your boss should be able to, they should listen to your expertise. If you know what you're
talking about, you can point them to references. If you, if they're unmoved by that, that's not,
that's not great for the, for the boss, in my view, they should be open to that kind of evidence
because there's, it's quite easy to show. The solution might be find a new boss.
I'm not telling people to change their jobs at this, in this environment.
Awesome. Thank you so much. Thank you everybody.
So I have one last duty at comp and that is to thank everyone. Hopefully.
Yes. Okay. So thank everyone. So first of all, I'd like to thank all of our speakers.
The speakers that will make comp and all of them have spent so much time as part of our
wonderful speaker training program with articulation. They have put the time in to
make amazing talks and I truly think it shows in the wonderful presentations you've all seen
this week. Thank you. I'd also like to thank our sponsors, AWS. Unfortunately,
these are not showing up on my monitor. So, uh, uh, jumping reference for a coach here,
Epsilon, A2AI and a Taurus. We really appreciate your support. I hope you've all had a chance to
hang out with them, learn what they do and see, see them in the lounge. Thank you.
And I'd love to join, you know, thank all of the other positive employees. This is truly
a team effort. I'm not going to try and name anyone because it's impossible to name everyone
who's really contributed to this conference, but this truly is a team effort consuming hundreds of
us both in person and online. So a big thanks to everyone at Posit who's made this possible.
And finally, a big thanks to you for coming to Conf. It's sort of hard for me to express
how much joy I feel at the community and the environment of this conference.
It's just so amazing to like feel the love for R and data science and Posit and Python.
So thank you all for coming, bringing such amazing energy.
And now I'll finish one and one last point. Two new things this year. First of all, like Discord
is going to continue to stay open after Conf. So you can stay in touch with all the friends you've
made. And if you've missed any sessions that will be recorded, the recordings are already available
in the app. And now for the thing that you're probably actually waiting for and why you haven't
just walked out of this room already. Where is Posit Conf 2026 going to be? I'm very excited
to announce that I'll be inviting you to my hometown of Houston, Texas, September 14 to 16
next year. As well as in person, we'll also continue the virtual program. Every year we're
trying to make that virtual program a little bit more robust. This year I think was the first year
we had things available to the virtual attendees that you didn't get in person. We're going to
continue that tradition. We know many of you like can't make it to Conf for whatever reason.
And we want to make it available to you regardless of how much money you have or where you live in
the world. At that point, one last announcement. We are also working really hard towards Posit Conf
Europe. I'd hope to be able to share precise details with you. We're not quite there yet,
but we're working really hard to make this happen. Probably sometime in a month or so after
Posit Conf US. We'll be announcing that hopefully pretty soon. Thank you very much.
Thanks for coming to Conf. Enjoy the rest of your day and see you around.